---
title: 'A new bioRxiv'
date: 2025-01-31
permalink: /posts/2025/01/10/acsnano/
tags:
  - against the stream
  - news
  - accepted
---

Stiffening cells with light. Eva Gonzalez*, Jana El Husseiny*, Finn Bastian Molzahn, Tiffany Campion, Hadrien Jalaber, Stéphanie Dogniaux, Pierre-Henri Puech, Oliver Nüsse, Laure Gibot, Julien Husson. bioRxiv. doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.01.30.635790 

Abstract : Fluorescence microscopy is widely used to observe structures and dynamic processes in living cells and organisms and is often used as if it were purely innocuous to the cells or structures of interest. However, it can lead to phototoxicity, which can affect the cellular behavior and lead to erroneous interpretations of the observations. The major cause of cell damage through phototoxicity is the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), which can form crosslinks between intracellular molecules, including proteins and nucleic acids. By using profile microindentation and atomic force microscopy, we demonstrate that the excitation of various fluorescent probes leads to a large increase in the stiffness of several cell types within seconds of illumination. The stiffening exhibits a dose-dependent response, where longer exposure times to exciting light are correlated with larger stiffening.
This photostiffening effect explains why T cells loaded with the Fluo-4 Calcium probe stop emitting a protrusion within seconds after the excitation light is turned on. We observed photostiffening in different cell types and fluorophores. We showed that repeated cell indentation alone led to cell stiffening as well as excitation with blue or UV light in the absence of a fluorophore. However, in the latter case, the stiffening was much smaller than that when the fluorophore was excited. We used both sharp and blunt indenters to show that stiffening occurred not only at the cell cortex level but also deeper in the cell interior and that photostiffening is independent of actin cytoskeleton organization. We correlated the increase in cell stiffness with the production of intracellular reactive oxygen species and reproduced cell stiffening by incubating cells with a ROS inducer, H2O2. The excitation of the photosensitizer Pheophorbide a, which induces a specific type of reactive oxygen species, namely singlet oxygen, also led to cell stiffening. This study reminds the experimentalists that it is crucial to perform controls when using fluorescence. It further allows us to propose exploiting photostiffening as a new method for rapidly quantifying phototoxicity.

